Project Proposal:

I will be the only member of the team for this project.

 I’ve always had the simple idea of creating a service to schedule texts to yourself and others. This seemed useful to me for two main reasons. First, in terms of organization and reminders, I feel that receiving a text from your past self would be more effective than any other reminder app. Second, there have been many instances when I have thought of texts to send to people, but for various reasons, I couldn’t text them at that moment.

To achieve this functionality, my project will resemble the given example project titled “Scheduled SMSes”. As such, it will let users send SMSes in real time and through scheduling. Beyond this, I plan to first extend the capabilities of this application by allowing the scheduling of recurring texts. Texts should be able to be sent to multiple numbers at once. In addition, a “neat” aspect I want to add is the ability to see other users of the app who are in your area and request their number. The APIs I plan on using are Twilio for SMS, and HTML Location for calculating the proximity of users.

The real time behavior should be as follows - users receive real time replies to any SMS messages sent through the app, as well as real time notifications for relevant updates. For example, if a user is currently on a page for one conversation and somebody replied to them from another conversation, they would receive a popup notification reflecting this, much like a traditional messenger app. Also, real time notifications should appear for users when another user sends them a friend/number request, or when another user accepts their request.


The persistent state of the app (besides users) that I will store in a postgres DB includes the scheduled/recurring messages that will be sent and the message history. In terms of what needs to be stored inside of each user entry inside the database, there should be an optional SMS number asked upon creation of a user. Additionally, I believe each user should have a geolocation tagged to them, stored in the database and updated upon each login.

This brings us to the details of the “neat” aspect of the project, which should present an interesting challenge. I already briefly discussed it above, but it is about using HTML5 Geolocation tracking to determine which users to recommend to other users (to befriend or exchange numbers). It only makes sense to have the location tracking trigger for logged in sessions. There will be a navigation tab titled “Discover Users” or “Meet Nearby Users”, which, when visited, will trigger a listing of all users filtered by a function that determines if each given user is close enough to the current user who requested the listing. The nature of how this processing will work allows for a customizable distance from which to exclude users, so it should be easy to let the user choose it in their settings.




The first experiment I tried was using the HTML5 Geolocation API, which is actually quite trivial in usage. Javascript allows me to use navigator.geolocation, and if the user’s browser has location tracking enabled, I am able to pull out the user’s latitude and longitude. So, the API itself is simple, it is more about updating the user’s location every time they log in (not just registering, as demonstrated in the experiment) and also checking proximity. From this experiment, I learned that grabbing the geolocation of a user is easy to do, and I just have to update the user’s object server side and client side to reflect the geolocation. Then, when a user wants to see nearby users, I make a server request to return all of the users who are within a given distance (which will involve a server function that makes use of each user’s latitude and longitude compared to the given user’s latitude and longitude).

The second experiment is about testing Twilio’s API for messaging. It turns out that Twilio does not have an official library for use with elixir, but there exists a library called “ex_twilio” that simplifies Twilio API calls. The file config.exs that I have included shows a barebones example of how you set up ex_twilio, and in this example I give it the SID and auth token I received after signing up for a free trial. Setting it up this way allows me to call an “ExTwilio.Message.create” method in send_message.ex, which is surprisingly simple. Obviously there are a couple other steps needed, such as including ex_twilio in the deps, but it is straightforward and works (although it includes the trial message as I have yet to upgrade my account). From this experiment, I learned the basics of authenticating with Twilio API using ex_twilio, and sending a message.

I expect the users of this app to be seeking organization and/or convenience. Something worth noting is that the texts sent out cannot be sent from the user’s own personal number (as far as I can tell). This is a limiting factor, because having to text people from an unknown number is undesirable. Still, users might use the ability to send out multiple scheduled texts if they wanted to invite friends and family to an event, although the capacity of modern venues to do the same thing shouldn’t be ignored. I expect the general demographics of the users to be predominantly young, ranging from teenagers to millenials with a small number of older people who have a good grasp on using various web tools to achieve what they want. Ultimately, there will feasibly be three kinds of users - those using the service for productivity/organization, those using the service due to restrictions preventing them from texting people on time, and those using the service to meet people in their area. Given the difference between the latter user’s reason for using the app and the others, I realize that the feature allowing users to find other users in their area is not exactly related to the overall premise of the app, and it might be something I tweak while creating the product.


The first kind of user story might go like this: Jake is a high school student who realizes he needs a way to remind himself later that he needs to study for a test coming up in the next week. He feels that if he can address his future self as his past self, and write a detailed message out, it will be more effective than the default iOS reminder app. So, he uses the web app to write out a text message and schedule it to deliver at the time when he believes he should start studying.

Another type of user story: Mary’s grandmother has a birthday on a day that happens to coincide with Mary’s long international flight. Mary can’t send the text on the plane, and doesn’t want to send an early or belated text, so she uses the web app to schedule her message at the perfect time.

Additional user story: Brian has been using the web app to schedule texts here and there. He clicks on the “Discover Nearby Users” tab, and sees several users who are within 2 miles of him. One of their statuses says “Looking for a running buddy”, another says “Looking for any party”. Brian sends a friend request to the user who is looking for a running buddy. A day later, he gets the notification that that user accepted his friend request. Now, he can message the user through the app or through the phone number given once the friend request was complete.

One thing worth considering is the pricing of the app, given that the Twilio API documentation posts the following price: 0.0075 to send and receive text messages. Twilio allows new api users to sign up for a free trial which includes $15 of credit. It also doesn’t require a credit card. Theoretically, it might be possible to have users of my app provide information that can be used to sign them each up for a free trial of Twilio. This is likely the most ideal method of dealing with the pricing - rather than having one server account for Twilio that sends out all API requests for users, incurring the costs in bulk. If I have to do it that way, users would be much more limited in terms of how many texts they can send. Twilio’s free trial version of the API may limit functionality too much, however. In fact, messages sent from a trial account begin with the phrase: “Sent from a Twilio Trial account”. As such, I will probably be forced to go the route of having the server control the main Twilio account, and it will have to have an upgraded subscription. Each user should therefore have a maximum amount of texts they can send (within a day). Since I don’t actually expect to have real users for this, a reasonable limit per day would be something like 5 texts. Unfortunately, a problem exists because Twilio charges for messages received. I can easily restrict messages sent from the Twilio API, but I am unsure of how to restrict messages received. A user could send a message from my web app to their phone, and then reply 100 times from their phone to incur me $0.75 in charges. This will be something that I have to look into, as it is a major consideration that comes alongside the real time reply feature.


A possible extension to this project is the addition of scheduled calls/voice messages. This is not the most practical idea, and has limited usage, but could lead to some interesting cases. It may also differentiate more from similar products to this project. I have always found the idea of texting your future self to be intriguing, but leaving a voice message that you receive in three weeks reaches conceptual territory outside of just organizing/reminding. It could be very desirable to people who subscribe to the idea that your past self is considerably different than who you are now, even after short periods of time like a month. Furthermore, it is more powerful than a recorded video that a user saves and opens up some time later.

If scheduled voice messages don’t work well with Twilio’s API, a more feasible extension would be to implement picture messages. This would certainly be desired by users, and the API makes it more clear as to how to achieve that in contrast to scheduled voice messages. It should be noted that picture messages cost over twice that of text messages. Thus, there would need to be a way to charge users accordingly or make it a “premium” feature.

I will now compare my app to those already existing on the market. Unfortunately, there are a large number of these similar services. The majority of these are mobile apps, and to list some: AutoSender, Scheduled App, Moxy Messenger, Text Me That. The only major difference with my web app would be its “neat” feature of discovering nearby users, although I realize that particular functionality is rather off brand with the rest of the product. Not all of these other applications have the ability to schedule recurring texts, but most do. Also, it seems that photo message capability is less common to see. That could be a differentiating point for my project. In terms of niches, the app “Text Me That” seems to completely cover the niche of users that are looking to send text reminders to themselves. Other apps address the sending of text messages to multiple other contacts.

This brings us to a large limitation caused by the project not being a mobile app - it would be most convenient to have the app grab the user’s contacts and then have them select which contacts to send scheduled messages to. As it currently stands, users of my web app would have to enter in each phone number for each person they want to send a message to. There is no easy way to access a user’s contacts, in the way that iOS or Android can do it.
